We had very few scholarships available to award to Corps members.
And they were awarded after school started, essentially, so they had nothing to do with recruiting people.
The recruiting effort was very small, very unsophisticated, very low budget.
No money, really, for that.
But, you know, we kept getting 700, 800, 900 freshmen every year without it.
this big recruiting effort.
But all that changed shortly after I came here with enrollment management and the limit on the number of freshmen.
It made us really get with it to recruit.
And then Desert Storm came along and the Cold War ended, or the Cold War ended first, and then Desert Storm, all those had a big impact on the military, cutbacks 40%.
They didn't need all these people that we'd been commissioning before, not that kind of number.
So gradually people, I think, became less interested in military careers.
The economy took off.
What I'm saying, recruiting became a real critical issue.
I started sensing this my first year here that we would have to do something with enrollment management coming.
We would have to do something about recruiting.
And in fact, I went to Dr. Vandiver in the spring of that year to ask for a recruiting officer position on the staff.
And he quickly agreed that I could have one.
We hired Mark Satterwhite.
I don't know if you know Mark or not.
Wife works over and worked for Gary Gaston.
I think she's an assistant vice president now.
But anyway, Mark came.
and became our first recruiting officer.
He was by himself doing recruiting.
We talked about building some brochures and things, and we didn't have any funds to do that.
We got this guy, Rod Dockery, who I had not met at that time.
He agreed.
He was very supportive of the Corps, and he agreed to publish all this stuff for free for us, which he did for a few years.
But most of what we got in the recruiting area was gratis kind of things.
But, you know, it's come from here to here.
It's been on a steep increase, the effort, the resources that we have to do recruiting, and I can talk more about that.
But I'll say that it's really increased and it's had to, and it's a struggle today to keep the numbers even flat.
How long was it before you began to see some results of the recruiting?
Well, I think we saw some payoff from this, but it's one of those things I don't know how you could really say, you know, it was a result of this.
Advertising, how much does it help?
You know, you have a feel for it, but I'm saying had we not been
deeply committed to recruiting on an increasing plane, the Corps would have really declined on us.
I think all the effort helped us stay fairly flat, but it did decline some.
And 1993 led to the big blue ribbon committee that we had that met off and on all year.
Recruiting was the
main emphasis.
What were the primary points in the advertising campaign?
What were you all saying about?
Leadership, character development, challenge, discipline, study time, mandatory study time,
Academic support, counselors, tutors, I could go, we added all of these things downstream.
Buck Henderson and I went over to Austin, way back there, when they first built their big athletic academic support complex over there.
Must have been, oh, 1989 or 90, somewhere along in there.
We'd heard that University of Texas
develop this new academic support center for athletes.
You get study facilities and computers and everybody helps you in all this.
So I forget the fellow's name, the professor that ran that thing.
And Buck and I went over there and spent a day with him.
It was very eye-opening to me to see what they had.
And I came back and I said, you know, we need something along this idea for the cadets.
You know, if you're going to be in a core, we want you to do well, we want you to graduate, and we're going to offer you all the assistance we can to help you.
And that was our thrust and goal.
And, you know, we were able to do some of that, but some students take advantage of it, and some, in spite of all you offer them, still won't take it or they won't do that well.
But nonetheless, the bottom line is recruiting was very meager.
and quickly it became apparent that we had to get in high gear, and they're still looking today at what we can do better to recruit.
But it's a tough environment today to recruit in.
The propensity of young people to join the military is as low as it's been since the end of World War II, or before World War II, and there are a lot of reasons for that.
Economy and
It's been a big thing, but the military has downsized so sharply.
I remember back in the, I believe it was in the mid-50s, there were 100,000 college students signed up for Air Force ROTC.
I don't know what the number is today, but I'll bet you it's well below 10,000.
It's just a fraction of what it was in those days.
Let's talk about women and minorities in the Corps.
Women, the number women began to grow, did it not?
It did.
It's been on an increase over the last,
12 years, I know that.
14 years, it's been on an increase.
I think it was fairly flat back when I came here those years.
I think I'd have to go back and check the numbers, but I'm guessing 50 or 60 something.
We had two separate women units, one called
W-2 or something as women-2 and the other was an Air Force unit.
I forget the squadron they were, but we had two separate women female units.
One Army and one Air Force.
The Navy, Marine didn't have anybody.
And they lived and operated as separate units?
As separate units.
How did that change in your 10 years?
I came, having gone through a lot of changes in the Air Force involving women and other things, and I think I was,
aware of what was going on, what I think was the military and the real world even, that things were changing.
I remember in the Air Force back in 73, I guess it was, I was working in the Pentagon and somebody came in with a proposal there that would allow pregnant women to remain in the Air Force.
It nearly knocked us out of our chairs.
We thought that was the most radical thing we'd heard because up until that point,
If you became pregnant, you were discharged.
And there was no fault how we could keep women in the military that were pregnant.
Well, you know, that all did change, and a lot of other things changed.
I knew that the Air Force had been pretty active in integration, and I'd been to places and heard commanders speak and say where they had integrated...
men and women together in the Air Force, the men performed better.
It all worked.
And even in dormitories or barracks buildings where they had some integration, it seemed to work better.
And I saw a lot of examples of that in the military, so I was kind of tuned into that when I came here.
And I didn't, all the other things going on, didn't have too much time to dwell on these separate women's unit.
It didn't take too long to start getting feedback that suggested these women weren't too happy.
They felt ridiculed.
They'd tell me stories about how the guys would sing Jody's and make fun of them.
They thought they were just playing core.
The women were just pretending they weren't really physical enough.
That's what the guys thought.
That's what the guys, that's what the women tell me.
That's what they got back from the guys.
And it became a sore subject to them to be marching in a unit down here and these guys standing over here
making crazy remarks and ridiculing them.
And that started to build some resentment in my mind about all this.
I didn't like that.
And that first spring I was here, or was it the second?
I guess it was the second spring.
We had our military day, and we had all these visiting cadets here from the academies and a few other military schools, about 50 of them.
And we had a parade over there on Simpson Field.
The old Rickerley review stand was there, and we'd invite these visiting cadets to stand there on the review stand with me.
And I was reviewing the troops, and they were all passing by, and the band was playing.
And...
These two women units come marching by.
Just a small little unit of women.
And everybody else is all male.
And this strong, husky, good-looking Air Force cadet was standing there by me.
And I never will forget this.
He kind of turned to me and he said, Sir, I thought they'd done away with all that separate stuff like that.
And, you know, that cut me, woke me up.
I said, you're right, that's essentially gone in the military.
He didn't know that at the Air Force Academy at that point.
And I went back and I started thinking about that and I said, you know, it's time we move on.
And I had gotten a, started getting calls from the Pentagon from senior officers up there saying, Tom, when are you all going to get out of the Stone Age down there?
You know, this integration thing, you know, it's moved way on.
You know, we want men to be able to work with women and vice versa.
You know, we expect that.
We're going to depend more on women.
And so you need to do something down there.
Well, you know, there wasn't one administration official here.
President John Coles, nobody ever gave me any instructions about women or you ought to integrate or not one word was spoken.
Until that kid told me, he said, sir, I thought that was a thing of the past.
And I sat out on my own.
I said, I'm going to do something about this.
And I tried to develop a plan and all.
And I remember writing a memo to John Colas saying, you know, we're starting our planning efforts to try integration in the Corps.
And, you know, he just kind of acknowledged it.
He didn't say, yeah, sure, go ahead and do that.
Mobley would have been president by then.
He didn't say anything.
And I'd been an ex-officio member of the faculty senate for four years by virtue of my position as head of the School of Military Sciences.
General Simpson had got it written in that that position would be an ex-officio member of the faculty senate back when it was organized.
So I'd go to those meetings.
And I started detecting some things from the faculty senate.
You know, didn't seem very much in favor of the Corps.
They didn't like a lot of things.
I really need to talk about that a little bit more here at some point.
But I could tell that although they never mentioned women to me per se, that they were kind of pushing some of those kind of issues.
But when I did go ahead and integrate, I said, what we'll do is we're going to take the spring semester, and I want to find a unit that will be willing to try this.
And I want to find some volunteer women that will go over there.
We want to put at least eight of them in there so that there will be some in each class.
So, you know, it's not just one over there, but you need at least eight, we determined.
to go over there and be a part of this unit.
I found one CO that came forward to me, Kyle Berry was his name, said, I'll be the CO, I'll be glad to try that in my unit.
And he did.
And it worked pretty well that spring.
We didn't have any problems.
Kind of surprised everybody.
But again, I was just pushing all this on my own.
Nobody was giving me any instruction.
Then the next year, the faculty said it and others started picking up on this thing.
And say, why don't you integrate the whole corps?
You know, why don't you take those 50 women you got and scatter them around the whole corps?
Well, we had 35 units.
So it'd be about one per unit.
And I don't think that'll work.
You know, that's suicide for these women to put one per unit like that.
So we had determined, based on what studies and all we'd done, we needed eight to integrate a unit.
So the plan was we would try to spread this more each year, recruit more women, grow this thing.
But what we ran into, most of the units didn't want to do it, and they're going to try to kill it any way they can.
And there's still units over there that are holding out that don't want to do it.
Not us.
Okay for those, but not us.
Who were your best allies in that effort?
Are there some individuals that were good allies on supporting the core integration?
Didn't have a lot of allies on that thing.
At the very beginning, the Air Force guy that was the head of the Air Force ROTC, he strongly supported it.
He was my strongest supporter.
He helped.
It was an Air Force unit that integrated.
But board members or faculty senate or...
Well, the faculty said it, it couldn't do it fast enough for them.
That was the only problem there, couldn't do it fast enough.
But you're implying that the board was very silent.
Very silent, very silent.
Did you hear from any former students?
Oh, did I?
Did I?
And they were, they were mostly against it.
What did the critics say was going to be the result?
Well, it'll ruin the Corps.
It'll drive these other folks off.
They don't want to go join being a Corps with a bunch of women.
It'll drag the men down, is what they say.
It'll kill the spirit.
It'll pull everybody down, you know, to their level.
They didn't think physically they could do all the stuff they could do.
We had a core development council meeting, I never will forget this, down in Houston.
And this is after about the second year we're into this thing when it became beyond that little pilot unit we had.
And a lot of the core development council members were just up in arms.
They were writing letters to the president.
All this stuff, Mobley.
Mobley became a supporter.
He became a strong supporter of it.
But initially he was, you know, wasn't involved.
But he became one of the strongest allies on that.
How long did it take before people began to accept that it was working?
Oh, a long time.
I went to that Court Development Council meeting, I say, and I got up and gave my report, and golly, they nearly hooted me out of there.
It was bad, but Dean Gage was interim at that time, and I remember he came to the meeting knowing that this was before, well, let's see, yeah, before, no, it was after Mobley, but he came to the meeting, well, I lose sight here of where I am, but I believe Gage came to the meeting,
because he knew that I was going to be attacked there.
Dean Gage was very supportive during his interim period, very supportive.
But some of the old Corps guys just got up and gave me the devil.
And, you know, I don't want those hides in the Corps, they would, terms like that, very derogatory kind of terms.
Now did band co-education come during the same period or was it earlier?
Yours in the band?
The band had women.
Okay, so that's earlier.
Okay.
The band had a few women, but I believe they still lived separately.
They weren't integrated in the dorm.
But the band accepted all that quite well.
Ray Toler was band director.
He was supportive, very supportive.
What about race and ethnicity?
Any particular events, efforts there?
Well, you know, we started looking at numbers and it sort of became a,
common goal around here to pursue minorities and we joined that effort.
I used to look at minorities and we usually ran ahead of the rest of the university on total on a percentage of minority students.
But I never saw any real problem with minorities.
There'd been an isolated situation or two but
The core, my experience says, is pretty accepting of people if they carry their weight, put out the effort and all.
They're very accepting.
And I try to tell people that my experience with...
minority students here is if you are an Aggie, then you're accepted.
Doesn't matter your skin color or where you're from or what your dad does or doesn't do.
If you're part of the group, come on in.
That women had a heck of a time when racial, I mean when coeducation began.
Women had a heck of a time here, but there was never a problem
for the first black students.
And now one of the handicaps here is there is not a big black professional group of people living in the community.
So it's hard to recruit white-collar black youngsters here.
I totally agree.
But I think generally the African Americans have had a pretty good shot in the Corps if they come in and put out the effort.
and do the best they can.
The Corps is very accepting if you do the best you can, but they're quick to recognize a gold brick or someone that's trying to goof off.
Were there any key women and or black Corps members during your years that are appropriate to identify in the individuals and their role?
I can think of one young lady, I can't recall her name right at the moment, I'd have to check it up, but... What did she do that was... She was a senior at the time, and 91 was the year that all...
Things fell apart, broke loose it seemed.
We had all kind of problems that year.
Ninety-one was the year that the sexual harassment and discrimination thing became the big news in the Corps and we were making not only state but national news.
It was discrimination and sexual harassment complaints and all of that.
And I don't know that that had anything to do with the integration thing.
I really don't think it did, but we had
tremendous problems in 91, one of the toughest years I ever went through.
Started off with this young member of the Parsons Mounted Cav, a female cadet, saying that she was a sophomore, saying that she'd been threatened with a knife out there in the parking lot by the security police, by the security office.
It was in the afternoon and she filed
you know, reported to the police and all that she had been threatened with a knife and told to get out of the calf, that she was not welcome there.
And that's a pretty serious charge in someone.
And she couldn't identify who the so-called attackers were, but, you know, she gave us some clue and all.
It set off investigations that went on a long time, were very deep.
resulted in 30-something disciplinary actions against members of Parsons Mounted Cav.
I suspended the operation for several weeks that fall after this thing kicked off.
What we found was discrimination against this young lady in the Parsons Mounted Cavalry.
The jobs they assigned her to do, the way they treated her, that's pretty well documented.
She, we never could pin down who threatened her if this case was true.
She later recanted her story to Bob Wyatt in a sense, saying that it really didn't happen the way I first said.
She didn't say something didn't happen.
People generally concluded after it's all over, well, that little girl just lied about it.
She recanted her story.
There's not a single evidence, a bit of truth about this thing.
the discrimination, the harassment was there.
There's no question about that.
And I had a lot of parents to deal with, lawyers to deal with.
The one kid that was the strongest suspect, a good-looking kid,
His parents came here.
They got a lawyer in town.
The lawyer came to see me, and I was so perturbed with him.
I told him, I said, the student's wasting his money dealing with you.
And he says, I'll show you.
I'll get an injunction against you, which he did.
He got an injunction to stop the action that I had pending against the student.
Oh, my.
The parents came to see me, the mother, and I talked with her and I told her that, you know, we're not there to hammer anyone.
We want to get to the bottom of things and we cannot tolerate harassment and stuff like that.
And I couldn't prove exactly what happened, but certain things I did know.
And she ended up, they ended up terminating their job.
deal with the lawyer, the injunction was lifted and we proceeded with the action and that lady's been very supportive and good terms since then.
But a lot of tough dealings were that Parsons Mounted Cavalry thing and this little girl, this young woman I'll say.
eventually left school, and it was a long, involved story.
I'd go over and visit her in the dorm, and I couldn't get much from her.
But the most complex case I've dealt with since I've been here.
But it left a bad taste.
But there was a young woman in the Corps that year that was a strong ally.
And there were some other cases that year involving some women.
Some of them had been...
Hazed, harassed, one of them was out at the bonfire cut site.
The CO decided that they all needed a lick on the bottom with a board out there, and he gave them all a lick.
I think she claimed it stung pretty good, but that was just one of a number of things that she charged.
the way she had been humiliated and discriminated against.
It was a pretty strong case she had, but there were several of those cases.
But this young woman, I thought, handled herself very well.
Not that she put down those kind of things, but she was a positive example.
and tried to argue that, you know, not everybody thinks that way, and I show you plenty of examples where people are mature about all this and know how to handle themselves, and it's good, and I've learned a lot as a woman in this cohort, and my life has improved a lot.
And so she was a very positive model there.
But when we were going through all that, I was still on the faculty senate, and they really took after my case.
They thought integration was proceeding far too slowly.
By the way, they did, I think, appreciate or not, that's not the right word.
They did agree on my suspending the cavalry unit.
When all this is going on, I said, there's too much going on here.
You're done.
You're going to cease and desist until we get this all sorted out and we get things reestablished the way they ought to be.
And that was a painful exercise.
And I took some flack, but you'd be surprised how many letters and phone calls I got from people saying, hey, boy, that was a good move.
That was a good move.
They deserved that.
But we got it all put back together.
But the Faculty Senate really jumped on integration about this time, like it was proceeding far too slowly.
Are you meaning they're racial or?
By women.
The integration of women is proceeding far too slowly.
And a lady by the name, Pat Alexander, from the English department, she later was speaker of the faculty senate.
She was not then, but she was a very active person in the meetings.
There were always a handful of people that spoke on every issue there at the faculty senate.
I'd go to those long meetings and listen to all this.
And it was an education to me.
And I got to meet and learn a lot of people, something about them.
And it was a good experience.
But anyway, I knew her a little bit.
But she got up and made a very emotional speech to the faculty senate one day that, you know, hell will freeze over before you get that core integrated the way you're going.
And that really stuck my stone.
During those years, did you get anonymous phone calls, hate mail unsigned, any of that?
Some.
Some of them didn't hesitate to sign and let you know, but some of it, yes.
Did any legislator attempt to influence your judgment?
Not that I remember.
And the board took no action or anything?
They seemed like I went over and maybe briefed them on a case or two, but I don't remember anything.
I really pretty much left that one alone.
All right, during those years of reality, on what kind of basis did you officially keep your administrative superiors aware?
You reported to Colas and to
the president, how often did you report to them by what was going on?
Well, with John, it was a daily kind of thing.
You know, we didn't have email in all those, so you had to send copies of things or call them.
We had a thing called an incident report, and we'd fill those out overnight, and sometimes it'd have a stack of them.
They amounted...
from little piddly things to something pretty significant sometimes.
But we had an incident form, and anything of any significance, we sent it over to John.
If necessary, I'd call him direct, and he was always very willing to hear me out and wanted to know, and there was never any problem.
Sometimes it's a question
You know, what does he really, do you really need to, does he need to know this one or not?
You can't bother him with everything, but, you know, after a while you learn which ones are there.
A good example that when it didn't work.
Of course, I depended on my staff to let me know when something went wrong that I needed to report.
I briefed many times at staff meetings and others, you know, be sure, don't hesitate to call me at 2 o'clock in the morning if there's an incident.
Well, this one morning I came to work at 7.30 and hadn't been there long until I got a phone, I believe it was from
I guess it was from John, John or Malam, John, I'm sure.
But he said something about, what about this shooting incident over in the dorm last night?
I said, I don't know what you're talking about.
He said, well, we just got a report here that there was a shooting or near shooting incident last night over in the dorm that this guy broke into this girl's room.